604395The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy — Book I, Section XIV: Of the motion of very small bodies when agitated by centripetal forces tending to the several parts of any very great body.Andrew MotteIsaac Newton
Banner, section XIV
Section XIV.
Of the motion of very small bodies when agitated by centripetal forces tending to the several parts of any very great bofy.
If two similar mediums be separated from each other by a space terminated on both sides by parallel planes, and a body in its passge through that space be attracted or impelled perpendicular towards either of thos mediums, and not agitated or hindered by any other force; and the attraction be every where the same at equal diameter from either plane, taken towards the same hand of the plane; I say that the fine of incidence upon either plane will be to the due of emergence from the other plane, in a given ratio.
Plate 25, Figure 1
Case. 1. Let Aa and Bb (Pl. 25. Fig. 1.) be
two parallel planes, and let the body light upon the first plane Aa in the direction of the line 
          G
            H
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle GH^{2}}
and in its whole passage through the intermediate
space let it be attracted or impelled towards the medium
of incidence, and by that action let it be
made to describe a curve line HI, and let it emerge
in the direction of the line IK. Let there be erected
IM perpendicular to Bb the plane of emergence,
and meeting the line of incidence GH prolonged
in M and the plane of incidence Aa in
R; and let the line of emergence KI be produced
and meet HM in L. About the centre L, with
the interval LI, let a circle be described cutting
both HM in P and Q, and MI produced in N;
and first, if the attraction or impulse be supposed
uniform, the curve HI (by what Galileo has demonstrated)
be a parabola, whose property is, that a
rectangle under its given latus rectum and the line
IM is equal to the square of HM; and moreover
the line HM will be bisected in L. Whence
if to MI there be let fall the perpendicular LO,
MO, OR will be equal; and adding the equal
lines ON, OI, the wholes MN, IR will be equal
also. Therefore since IR is given MN is also
given, and the rectangle NMI is to the rectangle
under the latus rectum and IM, than is, to 
          H
            M
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle HM^{2}}
in a given ratio. But the rectangle NMI is equal
to the rectangle PMQ that is, to the difference
of the squares 
          M
            L
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle ML^{2}}
, and 
          P
            L
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle PL^{2}}
 or 
          L
            I
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle LI^{2}}
; and
          H
            M
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle HM^{2}}
 hath a given ratio to its fourth part 
          M
            L
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle ML^{2}}
therefore the ratio of 
          M
            L
          &#x2212;
          L
            I
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle ML^{2}-LI^{2}}
 to 
          M
            L
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle ML^{2}}
 is
given, and by conversion the ratio of LI to ML,
and its subduplicate, the ratio of LI to ML. But
in every triangle as LMI, the lines of the angles
are proportional to the opposite sides. Therefore
the ratio of the line of the angle of incidence LMR to the line of the angle of emergence LIR is given.
Q. E. D.
Plate 25, Figure 2
Case 2. Let now the body pass successively
through several spaces terminated with parallel planes,
AabB, BbbC, &c. (Pl. 25. Fig. 2.) and let it
be acted on by a force which is uniform in each
of them separetly, but different in the different spaces;
and by what was just demonstrated, the
sine of the angle of incidence on the first plane Aa
is to the line of emergence from the second plane
Bb in a given ratio; and this line of incidence
upon the second plane Bb will be to the line of
emergence from the third plane Cc in a given ratio;
and this sine to the sine of emergence from the
fourth plane Dd in a given ration; and so on in
infinitum and by equality, the sine of incidence
on the first plane to the sine of emergence from
the last plane in a given ratio. Let now the intervals
of the planes be diminished, and their number
be infinitely increased, so that the action of attraction
or impulse, exerted according to any assigned
law, may become continual, and the ratio of
the line of incidence on the first plane to the sine
of emergence from the last plane being all along
given, will be given then also. Q. E. D.
The same things being supposed, I say that the velocity of the body before its incidence is to the veolocity after emergence as the sine of emergence to the sine of incidence.
Plate 25, Figure 3
Make AH and Id equal (PL. 25. Fig. 3.) and
erect the perpendicualrs AG, dK meeting the lines of incidence and emergence GH, Ik in G and K.
In GH take TH equal to IK, and to the plane
Aa let fall a perpendicular Tv. And (by cor. 2. of
the laws of motion) let the motion of the body be
resolved into two, one perpendicular to the planes Aa,
Bb, Cc, &c. and another parallel to them. The
force of attraction or impulse, acting in directions
perpendicular to those planes, does not at all alter
the motion in parallel directions; and therefore the
body proceeding with this motion will in equal times
go through those equal parallel intervals that lie between
the line AG and the point H, and between
the point I and the line JK; that is. they will describe
the lines GH, IK in equal times. Therefore
the velocity before incidence is to the velocity
after emergence as GK to IK or TH, that is
as AH or Id to vH, that is (suppoling TH or
IK radius) as the force of emergence to the sine of
incidence. Q. E. D.
The same thing being supposed, and that the motion before incidence is swifter than afterwards; I say, that if the {{ls]]ine of incidence be inclined continually, the body will be at last reflected, and the angle of reflexion will be equal to the angle of incidence.
Plate 25, Figure 4
For conceive the body passing between the parallel
planes Aa, Bb, Cc, &c. (Pl. 25. Fig. 4.) to
describe parabolic arcs as above; and let those arcs
be HP, PQ, QR, &c. And the obliquity of the line of incidence GH to the first plane
Aa be such, that the sine of incidence may be to
the radius of the circle whose sine it is, in the
same ratio which the same sine of incidence hath
to the sine of emergence from the plane Dd into
the space DdeE; and because the sine of emergence
is now become equal to radius, the angle of
emergence will be a right one, and therefore the
line of emergence will coincide with the plane Dd.
Let the body come to this plane in the point R;
and because the line of emergence coincides with
that plane it is manifest that the body can proceed
no farther towards the plane Ee. But neither
can it proceed in the line of emergence Rd; because
it is perpetually attracted or impelled towards the
medium of incidence. It will return therefore between
the planes Cc, Dd, describing an arc of a
parabola QRq; whose principal vertex (by what
Galileo has demonstrated) is in R, Cutting the plane
Ce in the same angle at q, that it did before at Q;
then going on in the parabolic arcs qp, ph, &c.
similar and equal to the former arcs QP, PH
&c. it will cut the rest of the planes in the same
p, h &c. as it did before in P, H, &c.
will emerge at last with the same obliquity
at h, with which it first impinged on that plane
at H. Conceive now the intervals of the planes
Aa, Bb, Cc, Dd, Ee, &c. to be infinitely diminished,
and the number infinitely increased, so
that the action of attraction or impulse, exerted
according to any assigned law,  may become continual;
and the angle of emergence remaining all
along equal to the angle of incidence will be equal
to the same also at last. Q. E. D. 
Scholium.
These attractions bear a great ressemblance to the
reflexions and refractions of light, made in a given
ratio of the secants, as was discovered by Smelluis;
and consequently in a given ratio of the sines, as
was exhibited by Des Cartes. For it is now certain
from the phænomena of Jupiter' Satellits confirmed
by the observations of different Astronomers,
that light is propagated in succession, and requires
about seven or eight minutes to travel from the
Sun to the Earth. Moreover the rays of light
that are in our air (as lately was discovered by
Grimaldus, by the admission of light into a dark
room through a small hole, which I have also
tried) in their passage near the angles of bodies
whether transparent or opake (such as the circular
and rectangular edges of gold, silver and brass coins,
or of knives or broken pieces of stone or glass)
are bent or inflected round those bodies as if they
were attracted to them; and those rays which in
their passage come nearest to the bodies are the
most inflected, as if they were most attracted;
which thing I my self have also carefully observed.
And thole which pass at greater distances are less
inflected; and those at still greater distances are a
little inflected the contrary way and form three
Plate 25, Figure 6
fringes of colours. In Pl. 25. Fig. 6. represents
the edge of a knife or any kind of wedge
Asb, gowog, fnunf, emtme, dlsld, are rays rays
inflected towards the knife in the arcs owo, nun,
mtm, lal; which inflection is greater or less according
to their distance from the knife. Now
since this inflection of the rays is performed in
the air without the knife, it follows that the which fall upon the knife are first inflected in
the air before they touch the knife. And the
case is the same of the rays falling upon glass.
The refraction therefore is made, not in the point
of incidence, but gradually, by a continual inflection
of the rays; which is done partly in the air
before they touch the glass, partly (if I mistake
not) within the glass, after they have entred it
Plate 25, Figure 7
as is represented (Pl. 25. Fig. 7.) in the rays ckzc,
buyb, ahxa, falling upon r, q, p
and inflected between k and z, i and y, h and x. Therfore hecause
of the analogy there is between the propagation
of the rays of light, and the motion of bodies,
I thought it not amiss to add the following propositions
for optical uses; not at all considering the nature
of the rays of light, or enquiring whether they
are bodies or not; but only determining the trajectories
of bodies which are extremely like the trarectories of the rays.
Supossing the sine of incidence upon any superficies to be in a given ratio to the sine of emergence; and that the inflection of the passs of those bodies near that superficies is performed in a very short space which may be confirmed as a point, it is required to determine such a superficies as may cause all the corpuscles issuing from any one given place to converge to another given place.
Plate 25, Figure 8
Let A (Pl. 25. Fig. 8.) be the place from
whence the corpuscles diverge; B the place to which they should converge; CDE the curve line
which by its revolution round the axis AB describes
the superficies sought; D, E, any two
points of that curve; and EF, EG perpendiculars
let fall on the paths of the bodies AD, DB. Let
the point D approach to and coalesce with the
point E; and the ultimate ratio of the line DF
by which AD is increased, to the line DG by
which DB is diminished, will be the same as that
of the sine of incidence to the sine of emergence.
Therefore the ratio of the increment of the line
AD to the decrement of the line D8 is given;
and therefore if in the axis AB there be taken any
where the point C through which the curve CDE
must pass, and CM the increment of AC be taken
in that given ratio to CN the decrement of
BC, and from the centres A, B, with the intervals
AM, BM there be described two circles cutting
each other in D; that point D will touch the
curve sought CDE, and by touching it any where
at pleasure, will determine that curve. Q. E. I.
Cor. 1. By causing the point A or B to go
off sometimes in infinitum, and sometimes to move
towards other parts of the point C, will be obtained
all those figures which Cartesuis has exhibited
in his Optics and Geometry relating to refractions.
The invention of which Cartesius having thought fit
to conceal, is here laid open in this proposition.
Plate 25, Figure 9
Cor. 2. If a body lighting on any superficies
CD (Pl. 25. Fig. 9.) in the direction of a right
line AD, drawn according to any law, should
emerge in the direction of another right line DK;
and from the point C there be drawn curve lines
CP, CQ always perpendicular to AD, DK; the
increments of the lines PD, QD, and therefore the lines themselves PD, QD, generated by those
increments, will be as the sines of incidence and
emergence to each other, and é contra.
The same thing supposed, if round the axis AB (Pl. 25. Fig. 10) any attractive superficies be described as CD, regular or irregular, through which the bodies issuing from the given place A must pass; it is required to find a second attractive supercies EF, which may make those bodies converge to a given place B.
Let a line joining AB cut the first superficies
in C and the second in E, the point D being
taken any how at pleasure. And supposing the
sine of incidence on the first superficies to s
of emergence from the same, and the sine of emergence
from the second superficies to the fine of
incidence on the same, to as any given quantity
M to another given quantity N; then produce
AB to G, so that BG may be to CE as M - N
to N; AD to H, so AH may be equal
to AG; and DF to K so tha DK may be
to DH as N to M. Join KB, and about the
centre D with the interval DH describe a circle
meeting KB produced in L, and raw BF
parallel to DL; and the point F will couch the line
EF, which being turned round the axis AB will
describe the superficies sought. Q. E. F.
For conceive the lines CP, CQ to be every where
perpendicular to AD, DF and the lines ER, ES to FB, FD respectively, and therefore QS to be always equal to CE; and (by cor. 2. prop. 97.) PD will be to QD as M to N, and therefore as DL to DK. or FB to FK; and by division as DL−FB or PH−PD−FB to FD or FQ−QD; and by composition as PH−FB to FQ, that is, (because PH and CG, QS and CE are equal) as CE+BG−FR to CE−FS. But (because BG is to CE, as M−N to N) it comes to pass also that CE+BG is to CE as M to N; and therefore, by division, FR is to FS as M to N; and therefore (by cor. 2. prop. 97.) the superficies EF compels a body, falling upon it in the direction DF to go on in the line FR to the place B. Q. E. D.
Scholium.
In the same manner one may go on to three or
more superficies. But of all figures the sphærical is the most proper for optical uses. If the object glasses of telescopes were made of two glasses of a
sphærical figure, containing water between them; it is not unlikely that the errors of the refractions made in the extreme parts of the superficies of the glasses, may be accurately enough corrected by the refractions
of the water. Such object-glasses are to be preferred before elliptic and hyperbolic glasses, not only because they may be formed with more ease and accuracy, but because the pencils of rays situate
without the axis of the glass would be more accurately refracted by them. But the different refrangibility of different rays is the real obstacle that hinders optics from being made perfect by sphærical or any other figures. Unless the errors thence arising can be corrected all the labour spent in correcting the others is quite thrown away.
The End of the First Volume.