594651The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy — Book I, Section X: Of the motion of bodies in given superficies, and of the reciprocal motion of funependulous bodies.Andrew MotteIsaac Newton

Section X.
Of the motion of bodies in given superficies, and of the reciprocal motion of funependulous bodies.
Any kind of centripetal force being supposed, and the centre of force, and any plane whatsoever in which the body revolves, being given, and the quadratures of curvilinear figures being allowed; it is required to determine the motion of a body going of from a given place, with a given velocity, in the direction of a given right line in that plane.
Plate 18, Figure 4
Let S (Pl. 18. Fig. 4.) be the centre of force,
SC the least distance of that centre from the given plane, P a body issuing from the place P in the
direction of the right line PZ, Q the same body
revolving in its trajectory, and PQR the trajectory
it self which is required to be found, described
in that given plane. join CQ, QS, and if in QS
we take SV proportional to the centripetal force
with which the body is attracted towards the centre
S, and draw VT parallel to CQ and meeting
SC in T; then will the force SV be resolved
into two, (by cor. 2. of the laws of motion) the
force ST, and the force TV; of which ST attracting
the body in the direction of a line perpendicular
to that plane, does not at all change its
motion in that plane. But the action of the other
force TV coinciding with the position of
the plane it self, attracts the body directly towards
the given point C in that plane; and therefore
causes the body to move in this plane in the same
manner as if the force ST were taken away, and
the body were to revolve in free space about the
centre C by means of the Force TV alone. But
there being given the centripetal force TV with
which the body Q revolves in free space about
the given centre C, there is given (by pro. 42.)
the trajectory PQR which the body describes;
the place Q in which the body will be found
at any given time; and lastly, the velocity of the
body in that place Q. And so è contra. Q. E. I. 
Supposing the centripetal force to be proportional to the distance of the body from the centre; all bodies revolving in any planes whatsoever will describe ellipses, and compleat their revolutions in equal times; and those which move in right lines, running backwards and forwards alternately, will compleat their several periods of going and returning in the same times.
For letting all things sland as in the foregoing
proposition, the force SV with which the body
Q revolving in any plane PQR is attracted towards
the centre S, is as the distance SQ; and
therefore because SV and SQ, TV and CQ are
proportional, the force TV with which the body
is attracted towards the given point C in the
plane of the orbit is as the distance C. Therefore
the forces with which bodies found in the
plane PQR are attracted towards the point C, are
in proportion to the distances equal to the forces
with which the same bodies are attracted every
way towards the centre S; and therefore the bodies
will move in the same times, and in the same
figures in any plane PQR about the point C, as
they would do in free spaces about the centre S;
and therefore (by cor. 2. prop. 10. and cor. 2. prop. 38) they will in equal times either describe
ellipses in that plane about the centre C, or move
to and fro in right lines passing through the centre
C in that plane; compleating the same periods
of time in all cases.   Q. E. D.
Scholium.
The ascent and descent of bodies in curve superficies
has a near relation to these motions we
have been speaking of. Imagine curve lines to
be described on any plane, and to revolve about
any given axes passing through the centre of
force, and by that revolution to describe curve superficies;
and that the bodies move in such
sort that their centres may be always found in
those superficies. If those bodies reciprocate to
and fro with an oblique ascent and descent; their
motions will be performed in planes passing
through the axis, and therefore in the curve lines
by whose revolution those curve superficies were
generated. In those cases therefore it will be
sufficient to consider the motion in those curve
lenes.
If a wheel sands upon the out-side of a globe at right angles thereto, and revolving about its own axis goes forward in a great circle; the length of the curvilinear path which any point, given in the perimeter of the wheel, hath desribed since the time that it touched the globe, (which curvilinear path we may call the cycloid or epicycloid) will be to double the versed sine of half the arc which since that time has touched the globe in passing over it, at the sum of the diameters of the globe and the wheel, to the semidiameter of the globe.
If a wheel stand upon the inside of a concave globe at right angles thereto, and revolving about its own axis go forward in one of the great circles of the globe, the length of the curvilinear path which any point, given in the perimeter of the wheel, hath described since it touched the globe, will be to the double of the versed sine of half the arc which in all that time has touched the globe in passing over it, as the difference of the diameter of the globe and the wheel, to the semidiameter of the globe.
Plate 19, Figure 1Plate 19, Figure 2
Let ABL (PL 19. Fig. 1.2.) be the globe, C
its centre. BPV the wheel insisting thereon, E
the centre of the wheel, B the point of contact,
and P the given point in the perimeter of the wheel. Imagine this wheel to proceed in the
great circle ABL from A through B towards
L. and in its progress to revolve in such a manner
that the arcs AB, PB may be always equal the
one to the other, and the given point P in the
perimeter of the wheel may describe in the mean
time the curvilinear path AP. Let AP be the
whole curvilinear path described since the wheel
touched the globe in A, and the length of this
path AP will be to twice the versed line of the
arc 
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
 PB, as 2 CE to CB. For let the right line
CE (produced if need be) meet the wheel in V,
and join CP, BP, EP, VP; produce CP, and let
fall thereon the perpendicular VF. Let PH, VH,
meeting in H, touch the circle in P and K and
let PH cut VF in G, and to VP let fall the perpendiculars
GI, HK. From the centre C with any
interval let there be described the circle nom, cutting
the right line CP in n, the perimeter of the
wheel BP in o, and the curvilinear path AP in
m; and from the centre V with the interval Va
let there be described a circle cutting VP produced
in q.
Because the wheel in its progress always revolves
about the point of contact B, it is manifest that
the right line BP is perpendicular to that curve
line AP which the point P of the wheel describes,
and therefore that the right line VP will touch
this curve in the point P. Let the radius of the
circle nom be gradually increased or diminished so
that at last it become equal to the distance CP;
and by reason of the similitude of the evanescent
figure Pnomq, and the figure PFGVI, the ultimate
ratio of the evanescent lineolæ Pm, Pn, Po,
Pq, that is, the ratio of the momentary mutations of the curve AP, the right line CP, the circular
arc BP, and the right line VP, will be the same as
of the lines PV, PF, PG, PL, respectively. But
since VF is perpendicular to CF, and VH to CV,
and therefore the angles HVG, VCF equal; and
the angle VHG (because the angles of the quadrilateral
figure HVEP are right in V and P) is equal
to the angle CEP, the triangles VHG, CEP
will be similar; and thence it will come to pass that
as EP is to CE so is HG to HV or HP, and
so KI to KP, and by composition or division as
CB to CE so is PI to PK, and doubling the consequents
as CB to CE so is PI to PV and so is
Pq to Pm. Therefore the decrement of the line
VP, that is the increment of the line BV - VP
to the increment of the curve line AP is in a
given ratio of CB to 2 CE, and therefore (by cor.
lem. 4.) the lengths BV - VP and AP generated
by those increments, are in the same ratio. But if
BV be radius, VP is the cosine of the angle BVP
or 
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
 BEP, and therefore BV - VP is the versed
sine of the same angle; and therefore in this wheel
whose radius is 
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
 BV, BV - VP will be double
the versed fine of the arc 
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
 BP. Therefore AP
is to double the versed fine of the arc 
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
 BP as 2 CE
to CB. Q. E. D.
The line AP in the former of these propositions
we shall name the cycloid without the globe, the other
in the latter proposition the cycloid within the
globe, for distinction sake.
Cor. 1. Hence if there be described the entire
cycloid ASL and the same be bisected in S, the
length of the part PS will be to the length PVT
(which is the double of the line of the angle VBP, when EB is radius) as 2 CE to CB, and
therefore in a given ratio.
Cor. 2. And the length of the semi-perimeter
of the cycloid AS will be equal to a right line
which is to the diameter of the wheel BV as
2 CE to CB.
To cause a pendulous body to oscillate in a given cycloid.
Plate 19, Figure 3
Let there be given within the globe QVS,
(Pl. 19. Fig. 3.) described with the centre C,
the cycloid QRS, bisected in R, and meeting the
superficies of the globe with its extreme points Q
and S on either hand. Let there be drawn
CR bisecting the arc QS in O, and let it be produced
to A in such sort that CA may be to CO
as CO to CR. About the centre C, with the interval
CA, let there be described an exterior globe
DAF, and within this globe; by a wheel whose
diameter is AO, let there be described two semi-cycloids
AQ, AS, touching the interior globe in Q
and S, and meeting the exterior globe in A. From
that point A, with a thread APT in length equal
to the line AR, let the body T depend, and oscillate
in such manner between the two semi-cycloids
AQ, AS that as often as the pendulum parts from
the perpendicular AR, the upper part of the thread
AP may be applied to that semi-cycloid APS
towards which the motion tends, and fold it self
round that curve line, as if it were some solid obstacle; the remaining part of the same thread PT
which has not yet touched the semi-cycloid continuing
straight. Then will the weight T oscillate
in the given cycloid QRS. Q. E. F.
For let the thread P meet the cycloid QRS
in T and the circle QOS in V and let CV be
drawn; and to the rectilinear part of the thread PT
from the extreme points P and T let there be erected
the perpendiculars BP. TW, meeting the
right line CV in B and W. It is evident from
the construction and generation of the similar figures
AS, SR, that those perpendiculars PB, TW,
cut off from CV the lengths VB, VW equal to the
diameters of the wheels OA, OR. Therefore TP
is to VP (which is double the fine of the angle VBP
when 
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\frac {1}{2}}}
 BV is radius) as BW to BV, or AQ + OP
to AO, that is (since CA and CO, CO and CR,
and by division AO and OR are proportional) as
CA + CO to CA; or, if BV be bisected in E, as
2 CE to CB. Therefore (by cor. 1. prop. 49)
the length of the rectilinear part of the thread PT
is always equal to the arc of the cycloid PS, and
the whole thread APT is always equal to the
half of the cycloid APS, that is (by cor. 2. prop.
49.) to the length AR. And therefore contrary-wise,
if the string remain always equal to the
length AR the point T will always move in
given cycloid QRS. Q. E. D.
Cor. The string AR is equal to the semi-cycloid
AS, and therefore has the same ratio to AC
the semi-diameter of the exterior globe as the like
semi-cycloid SR has to CO the semi-diameter of
the interior globe. 
If a centripetal force tending on all sides to the centre C of a globe (Pl. 19. Fig. 4.) be in all places as the distance of the place from the centre, and by this force alone acting upon it, the body T oscillate (in the manner above descrid) in the perimeter of the cycloid QRS; I say that all the oscillations bow unequal soever in themseves will be performed in equal times.
Plate 19, Figure 4
For upon the tangent TW infinitely produced
let fall the perpendicular CX and join CT. Because
the centripetal force with which the body T is impelled
towards C is as the distance CT; let this
(by cor. 2. of the laws) be resolved into the parts
CX, TX of which CX impelling the body directly
from P stretches the thread PT and by the
resistance the thread makes to it is totally employed,
producing no other effect; but the other part
TX, impelling the body transversely or towards X directly
accelerates the motion in the cycloid.
Then it is plain that the acceleration of the body,
proportional to this accelerating force, will be every
moment as the length TX, that is, (because CV,
WV, and TX, TW proportional to them are given)
a the length TW that is (by cor. 1. prop. 49.)
as the length of the arc of the cycloid TR. If therefore two pendulums APT; Apt be unequally
drawn aside from the perpendicular AR, and
let fall together, their accelerations will be always
as the arcs to be described TR, tR. But the parts
described at the beginning of the motion are as the
accelerations, that is, as the wholes that are to be
described at the beginning, and therefore the parts
which remain to be described and the subsequent
accelerations proportional to those parts, are also as
the wholes, and so on. Therefore the accelerations,
and consequently the velocities generated, and the
parts described with those velocities, and the parts
to be described, are always as the wholes; and
therefore the parts to be described preserving a given
ratio to each other will vanish together, that
is, the two bodies oscillating will arrive together
at the perpendicular AR. And since on the other
hand the ascent of the pendulums from the lowest
place R through the same cycloidal arcs with
a retrograde motion, is retarded in the several places
they pass through by the same forces by which
their descent was accelerated, 'tis plain that the velocities
of their ascent and descent through the same
arcs are equal, and consequently performed in equal
times; and therefore since the two parts of the cycloid
RS and RQ lying on either side of the perpendicular
are similar and equal, the two pendulum
will perform as well the wholes as the halves of their
oscillations in the same time. Q. E. D.
Cor. The force with which the body T is accelerated
or retarded in any place T of thr cycloid,
is to the whole weight of the same body in the
highest place S or Q, as the arc of the cycloid TK
is to the arc SR or QR. 
To define the velocities of the pendulums in the several places, and the times in which both the entire oscillation, and the several parts of them are performed.
Plate 20, Figure 1
About any centre G (Pl. 20. Fig. 1.) with the
interval GH equal to the arc of the cycloid RS,
describe a semi-circle HKM bisected by the semi-diameter
GK. And if a centripetal force proportional
to the distance of the places from the centre
tend to the centre G, and it be in the perimeter
HIK equal to the centripetal force in the perimeter
of the globe QOS tending towards its centre, and
at the same time that the pendulum T is let fall
from the highest place S, a body as L is let fall
from H to G; then because the forces which act
upon the bodies are equal at the beginning, and always
proportional to the spaces to be described TR,
LG, and therefore if TR and LG are equal, are
also equal in the places T and L, it is plain that
those bodies describe at the beginning equal spaces
ST, HL, and therefore are still acted upon
equally, and continue to describe equal spaces.
Therefore by prop. 38; the time in which the body
describes the arc ST is to the time of one
oscillation, as the arc HI the time in which the body H arrives at L, to the semi-periphery HKM,
the time in which the body H will come to M.
And the velocity of the pendulous body in the
place T is to its velocity in the lowest place R,
that is, the velocity of the body H in the plane
L to its velocity in the place G, or the momentary
increment of the line HL to the momentary
increment of the line HG. (the arcs HI, HK
increasing with an equable flux) as the ordinate
LI to the radius GK or as, 
              S
                R
              &#x2212;
              T
                R
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\sqrt {SR^{2}-TR^{2}}}}
 to SR.
Hence since in unequal oscillations there are described
in equal times arcs proportional to the entire arcs of
the oscillations; there are obtained from the times
given, both the velocities and the arcs described
in all the oscillations universally. Which was first
required.
Let now any pendulous bodies oscillate in different
cycloids described within different globes,
whose absolute forces are also different; and if the
absolute force of any globe QOS be called V,
the accelerative force with which the pendulum is
acted on in the circumference of this globe, when
it begins to move directly towards its centre, will
be as the distance of the pendulous body from
that centre and the absolute force of the globe
conjunctly, that is, as CO x V. Therefore the
lineola HT which is as this accelerative force CO x V
will be described in a given time; and if there
be erected the perpendicular TZ meeting the circumference
in Z, the nascent arc HZ will denote
that given time. But that nafcent arc HZ is in
the subduplicate ratio of the rectangle GHT, and
therefore as 
              G
              H
              &#x00D7;
              C
              O
              &#x00D7;
              V
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\sqrt {GH\times CO\times V}}}
. Whence the time of
an entire oscillation in the cycloid QRS (it being as the semi-periphery HKM which denotes that
entire oscillation, directly; and as the arc HZ which
in like manner denotes a given time inversely) will
be as GH directly and, 
              G
              H
              &#x00D7;
              C
              O
              &#x00D7;
              V
    {\displaystyle \scriptstyle {\sqrt {GH\times CO\times V}}}
 inversely,
that is, because GH and SR are equal, as, 
                  S
                  R
                  C
                  O
                  &#x00D7;
                  V
    {\displaystyle \textstyle {\sqrt {\frac {SR}{CO\times V}}}}
,
or (by cor. prop. 50.) as 
                  A
                  R
                  A
                  C
                  &#x00D7;
                  V
    {\displaystyle \textstyle {\sqrt {\frac {AR}{AC\times V}}}}
. Therefore
the oscillations in all globes and cycloids, performed
with what absolute forces soever, are in a ratio
compounded of the subduplicate ratio of the length
of the string directly, and the subduplicate ratio
of the distance between the point of fufpension and
the centre of the globe inversely, and the subduplicate
ratio of the absolute force of the globe inversely also.
Q. E. I.
Cor. 1. Hence also the times of oscillating, falling,
and revolving bodies may be compared among
themselves. For if the diameter of the wheel with
which the cycloid is described within the globe is
supposed equal to the semi-diameter of the globe, the
cycloid will become a right line passing through the
centre of the globe, and the oscillation will be changed
into a descent and subsequent ascent in that right
line. Whence there is given both the time of the
descent from any place to the centre, and the time
equal to it in which the body revolving uniformly
about the centre of the globe at any distance
describes an arc of a quadrant. For this time (by
case 2.) is to the time of half the oscillation in any
cycloid QRS as 1 to 
                  A
                  R
                  A
                  C
    {\displaystyle \textstyle {\sqrt {\frac {AR}{AC}}}}
.
Cor. 2. Hence also follow what Sir Christopher
Wren and M. Huygens have difcovered concerning the vulgar cycloid. For if the diameter of the globe
be infinitely increased, its sphærical superficies will
be changed into a plane, and the centripetal
force will act uniformly in the direction of lines
perpendicular to that plane, and this cycloid of ours
will become the same with the common cycloid.
But in that case the length of the arc of the cycloid
between that plane and the describing point,
will become equal to four times the versed sine of
half the arc of the wheel between the same plane
and the describing point as was discovered by Sir
Christopher Wren. And a pendulum between two
such cycloids will oscillate in a similar and equal
cycloid in equal times as M. Huygens demonstrated.
The descent of heavy bodies also in the time
of one oscillation will be the same as M. Huygens
exhibited.
The propositions here demonstrated are adapted to
the true constitution of the Earth, in so far as wheels
moving in an of its great circles will describe by
the motions of nails fixed in their perimeters, cycloids
without the globe; and pendulums in mines and
deep caverns of the Earth must oscillate in cycloids
without the globe, that those oscillations may be performed
in equal times. For gravity (as will be shewn
in the third book) decreafes in its progress from the
superficies of the Earth; upwards in a duplicate ratio
of the distances from the centre of the earth, downwards
in a simple ratio of the same. 
Granting the quadratures of curvilinear figures, it is required to found the forces with which bodies moving in given curve lines may always perform their oscillations in equal times.
Plate 20, Figure 2
Let the body T (Pl. 20. Fig. 2.) oscillate in
any curve line STRQ, whose axis is AR passing
through the centre of force C. Draw TX touching
that curve in any place of the body T, and
in that tangent TX take TY equal to the arc TR.
The length of that arc is known from the common
methods used for the quadratures of figures.
From the point Y draw the right line YZ perpendicular
to the tangent. Draw CT meeting that
perpendicular in Z, and the centripetal force
will be proportional to the right line TZ.
Q. E. I.
For if the force with which the bod is attracted
from T towards C be expressed by the right
line TZ taken proportional to it, that force will be
resolved into two forces TY, YZ, of which YZ
drawing the body in the direction of the length of
the thread PT does not at all change its motion;
whereas the other force TY directly accelerates or
retards its motion in the curve STRQ. Wherefore
since that force is as the space to be described
TR, the accelerations or retardations of the body in
describing two proportional parts (a greater and a less) of two oscillations, will be always as those parts,
and therefore will cause those parts to be described
together. But bodies which continually describe together
parts proportional to the wholes, will describe
the wholes together also.   Q. E. D.
Plate 20, Figure 3
Cor. 1. Hence if the body T (Pl. 20. Fig. 3.)
hanging by a rectilinear thread AT from the centre
A, describe the circular arc STRQ, and in the
mean time be acted on by any force tending downwards
with parallel directions, which is to the uniform
force of gravity as the arc TR to its sine TN,
the times of the several oscillations will be equal.
For because TZ, AR are parallel. the triangle
ATN, ZTY are similar; and therefore TZ will
be to AT as TY to TN; that is, if the uniform
force of gravity be expressed by the given length
AT the force TZ by which the oscillations become
isochronous, will be to the force of gravity
AT; as the arc TR equal to TY is to TN the sine of
that arc.
Cor. 2. And therefore in clocks, if forces were
impressed by some machine upon the pendulum
which preserves the motion, and so compounded
with the force of gravity, that the whole force
tending downwards should be always as a line produced
by applying the rectangle under the arc TR
and the radius AR to the line TN, all the oscillations
will become isochronous. 
Granting the quadratures of curvilinear figures, it is required to find the times, in which bodies by means of any centripetal force will descend or ascend in any curve lines described in a plane passing through the centre of force.
Plate 20, Figure 4
Let the body descend from any place S (Pl.
20. Fig. 4.) and move in any curve STtR, given in
a plane passing through the centre of force C.
Join CS, and let it be divided into innumerable
equal parts, and let Dd be one of those parts.
From the centre C, with the intervals CD, Cd,
let the circles DT, dt be described, meeting the
curve line STtR in T and t. And because the law
of centripetal force is given, and also the altitude CS
from which the body at firsts fell; there will be
given the velocity of the body in any other altitude
CT (by prop. 39.) But the time in which
the body describes the lineola Tt is as the length
of that lineola, that is. as the fecant of the angle
tTC directly, and the velocity inversely. Let the
ordinate DN, proportional to this time, be made
perpendicula to the right line CS at the point D,
an because Dd is given, the rectangle Dd x DN
that is, the area DNnd, will be proportional to the
same time. Therefore if PNn be a curve line in
which the point N is perpetually found, and its asymptote be the right line SQ slanding upon the
line CS at right angles, the area SQPND will be
proportional to the time in which the body in its
descent hath described the line ST; and therefore
that area being found the time is also given.
Q. E. I.
If a body move in any curve superficies whose axis passes trough the centre of force, and from the body a perpendicular be let fall upon the axis; and a line parallel and equal thereto be drawn from any given point of the axis; I say, that this parallel line will describe an area proportional to the time.
Plate 20, Figure 5
Let BKL (Pl. 20. Fig. 5.) be a curve superficies,
T a body revolving in it, STR a trajectory
which the body describes in the same, S
the beginning of the trajectory, OMK the axis
of the curve superficies, TN a right line let fall
perpendicularly from the body to the axis; OP
a line parallel and equal thereto drawn from the
given point O in the axis; AP the orthographic
projection of the trajectory described by the point
P in the plane AOP in which the revolving
line OP is found; A the beginning of that projection
answering to the point S; TC a right line
drawn from the body to the centre; TG a part thereof proportional to the centripetal force with
which the body tends towards the centre C; TM
a right line perpendicular to the curve superficies;
TI a part thereof proportional to the force of
pressure with which the body urges the superficies,
and therefore with which it is again repelled by
the superficies towards M; PTF a right line
parallel to the axis and passing through the body,
and GF, IH right lines let fall perpendicularly
from the points G and I upon that parallel
PHTF. I say now that the area AOP, described
by the radius OP from the beginning of
the motion is proportional to the time. For the
force TG (by cor. 2. of the laws of motion) is
resolved into the forces TF, FG; and the force
TI into the forces TH, HI; but the forces TF,
TH acting in the direction of the line PF perpendicular
to the plane AOP, introduce no change
in the motion of the body but in a direction
perpendicular to that plane. Therefore its motion
so far as it has the same direction with the position
of the plane, that is, the motion of the
point P, by which the projection AP of the
trajectory is described in that plane, is the same as
if the forces TF, TH were taken away, and the
body were acted on by the forces FG, HI alone;
that is, the same as if the body were to
describe in the plane AOP the curve AP by
means of a centripetal force tending to the centre
O, and equal to the sum of the forces FG and
HI. But with such a force as that (by prop. 1.)
the area AOP will be described proportional to the
time. Q. E. D.
Cor. By the same reasoning if a body, acted
on by forces tending to two or more centres in any the same right line CO, should describe in a
free space any curve line ST; the area AOP
would always proportional to the time.
Granting the quadratures of curvilinear figures and supposing that there are given both the law of centripetal force tending to a given centre, and the curve supesficies whos axis passes through that centre; it if required to find the trajectory which a body will describe in that superificies, when going of from a given place with a given velocity, and in a given direction in that superficies.
Plate 20, Figure 6
The last construction remaining, let the body
T go from the given place S (Pl. 20. Fig. 6.) in
the direction of a line given by position, and turn
into the trajectory sought STR whose orthographic
projection in the plane BLO is AP. And from
the given velocity of the body in the altitude
SC, its velocity in any other altitude TC will be also
given. With that velocity in a given moment
of time let the body describe the particle Tt of
its trajectory, and let Pp be the projection of that
particle described in the plane AOP. Join Op,
and a little circle being described upon the curve
superficies about the centre T with the interval Tt,
let the projection of that little circle in the plane AOP be the ellipsis pQ And because the magnitude
of that little circle Tt, and TN or PO its distance
from the axis CO is also given, the ellipsis pQ
will be given both in kind and magnitude, as also
its position to the right line PO. And since the
area POp is proportional to the time, and therefore
given because the time is given the angle POp will
be given. And thence will be given p the common
intersection of the ellipsis and the right line Op, together
with the angle OPp in which the projection
APp of the trajectory cuts the line OP. But from
thence (by conferring prop. 41. with its 2d cor.)
the manner of determining the curve APp easily
appears. Then from the several points P of that projection
erecting to the plane AOP the perpendicular
PT meeting the curve superficies in T, there will be
given the several points T of the trajectory. Q. E. I.